exporter/prometheusremotewriteexporter/README.md, before:

# Prometheus Remote Write Exporter

<!-- status autogenerated section -->
| Status        |           |
| ------------- |-----------|
| Stability     | [beta]: metrics   |
| Distributions | [core], [contrib], [aws], [observiq] |
| Issues        | ![Open issues](https://img.shields.io/github/issues-search/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib?query=is%3Aissue%20is%3Aopen%20label%3Aexporter%2Fprometheusremotewrite%20&label=open&color=orange&logo=opentelemetry) ![Closed issues](https://img.shields.io/github/issues-search/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib?query=is%3Aissue%20is%3Aclosed%20label%3Aexporter%2Fprometheusremotewrite%20&label=closed&color=blue&logo=opentelemetry) |

[beta]: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector#beta
[core]: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-releases/tree/main/distributions/otelcol
[contrib]: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-releases/tree/main/distributions/otelcol-contrib
[aws]: https://github.com/aws-observability/aws-otel-collector
[observiq]: https://github.com/observIQ/observiq-otel-collector
<!-- end autogenerated section -->

Prometheus Remote Write Exporter sends OpenTelemetry metrics
to Prometheus [remote write compatible
backends](https://prometheus.io/docs/operating/integrations/)
such as Cortex, Mimir, and Thanos.
By default, this exporter requires TLS and offers queued retry capabilities.

:warning: Non-cumulative monotonic, histogram, and summary OTLP metrics are
dropped by this exporter.

A [design doc](DESIGN.md) is available to document in detail
how this exporter works.

## Getting Started

The following settings are required:

- `endpoint` (no default): The remote write URL to send remote write samples.

By default, TLS is enabled and must be configured under `tls:`:

- `insecure` (default = `false`): whether to enable client transport security for
  the exporter's connection.

As a result, the following parameters are also required under `tls:`:

- `cert_file` (no default): path to the TLS cert to use for TLS required connections. Should
  only be used if `insecure` is set to false.
- `key_file` (no default): path to the TLS key to use for TLS required connections. Should
  only be used if `insecure` is set to false.

The following settings can be optionally configured:

- `external_labels`: map of labels names and values to be attached to each metric data point
- `headers`: additional headers attached to each HTTP request.
  - *Note the following headers cannot be changed: `Content-Encoding`, `Content-Type`, `X-Prometheus-Remote-Write-Version`, and `User-Agent`.*
- `namespace`: prefix attached to each exported metric name.
- `remote_write_queue`: fine tuning for queueing and sending of the outgoing remote writes.
  - `enabled`: enable the sending queue
  - `queue_size`: number of OTLP metrics that can be queued. Ignored if `enabled` is `false`
  - `num_consumers`: minimum number of workers to use to fan out the outgoing requests.
- `resource_to_telemetry_conversion`
  - `enabled` (default = false): If `enabled` is `true`, all the resource attributes will be converted to metric labels by default.
- `target_info`: customize `target_info` metric
  - `enabled` (default = true): If `enabled` is `true`, a `target_info` metric will be generated for each resource metric (see https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/2381).
- `scope_info`: customize `otel_scope_info` metric
  - `enabled` (default = false): If `enabled` is `true`, a `otel_scope_info` metric will be generated for each instrumentation scope metric (see https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/2703).
- `export_created_metric`:
  - `enabled` (default = false): If `enabled` is `true`, a `_created` metric is
    exported for Summary, Histogram, and Monotonic Sum metric points if
    `StartTimeUnixNano` is set.

Example:

```yaml
exporters:
  prometheusremotewrite:
    endpoint: "https://my-cortex:7900/api/v1/push"
    wal: # Enabling the Write-Ahead-Log for the exporter.
      directory: ./prom_rw # The directory to store the WAL in
      buffer_size: 100 # Optional count of elements to be read from the WAL before truncating; default of 300
      truncate_frequency: 45s # Optional frequency for how often the WAL should be truncated. It is a time.ParseDuration; default of 1m
    resource_to_telemetry_conversion:
      enabled: true # Convert resource attributes to metric labels
```

Example:

```yaml
exporters:
  prometheusremotewrite:
    endpoint: "https://my-cortex:7900/api/v1/push"
    external_labels:
      label_name1: label_value1
      label_name2: label_value2
```

## Advanced Configuration

Several helper files are leveraged to provide additional capabilities automatically:

- [HTTP settings](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/config/confighttp/README.md)
- [TLS and mTLS settings](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/config/configtls/README.md)
- [Retry and timeout settings](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/exporter/exporterhelper/README.md), note that the exporter doesn't support `sending_queue` but provides `remote_write_queue`.

## Metric names and labels normalization

OpenTelemetry metric names and attributes are normalized to be compliant with Prometheus naming rules. [Details on this normalization process are described in the Prometheus translator module](../../pkg/translator/prometheus/).

[beta]:https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector#beta
[contrib]:https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-releases/tree/main/distributions/otelcol-contrib
[core]:https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-releases/tree/main/distributions/otelcol

Commit message:

prometheus exporters: Add add_metric_suffixes configuration option (#24260)
**Description:**
Add add_metric_suffixes configuration option, which can disable the
addition of type and unit suffixes.
This is backwards-compatible, since the default is true.

This is recommended by the specification for sum suffixes in
https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/compatibility/prometheus_and_openmetrics.md#sums
and allowed in metadata

https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/compatibility/prometheus_and_openmetrics.md#metric-metadata-1:

`Exporters SHOULD provide a configuration option to disable the addition
of _total suffixes.`

`The resulting unit SHOULD be added to the metric as OpenMetrics UNIT
metadata and as a suffix to the metric name unless the metric name
already contains the unit, or the unit MUST be omitted`

This deprecates the BuildPromCompliantName function in-favor of
BuildCompliantName, which includes the additional argument for
configuring suffixes.

**Link to tracking Issue:**

Fixes
https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/issues/21743
Part of
https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/issues/8950

---------

Co-authored-by: Dmitrii Anoshin <anoshindx@gmail.com>

exporter/prometheusremotewriteexporter/README.md, after:

# Prometheus Remote Write Exporter

<!-- status autogenerated section -->
| Status        |           |
| ------------- |-----------|
| Stability     | [beta]: metrics   |
| Distributions | [core], [contrib], [aws], [observiq] |
| Issues        | ![Open issues](https://img.shields.io/github/issues-search/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib?query=is%3Aissue%20is%3Aopen%20label%3Aexporter%2Fprometheusremotewrite%20&label=open&color=orange&logo=opentelemetry) ![Closed issues](https://img.shields.io/github/issues-search/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib?query=is%3Aissue%20is%3Aclosed%20label%3Aexporter%2Fprometheusremotewrite%20&label=closed&color=blue&logo=opentelemetry) |

[beta]: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector#beta
[core]: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-releases/tree/main/distributions/otelcol
[contrib]: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-releases/tree/main/distributions/otelcol-contrib
[aws]: https://github.com/aws-observability/aws-otel-collector
[observiq]: https://github.com/observIQ/observiq-otel-collector
<!-- end autogenerated section -->

Prometheus Remote Write Exporter sends OpenTelemetry metrics
to Prometheus [remote write compatible
backends](https://prometheus.io/docs/operating/integrations/)
such as Cortex, Mimir, and Thanos.
By default, this exporter requires TLS and offers queued retry capabilities.

:warning: Non-cumulative monotonic, histogram, and summary OTLP metrics are
dropped by this exporter.

A [design doc](DESIGN.md) is available to document in detail
how this exporter works.

## Getting Started

The following settings are required:

- `endpoint` (no default): The remote write URL to send remote write samples.

By default, TLS is enabled and must be configured under `tls:`:

- `insecure` (default = `false`): whether to enable client transport security for
  the exporter's connection.

As a result, the following parameters are also required under `tls:`:

- `cert_file` (no default): path to the TLS cert to use for TLS required connections. Should
  only be used if `insecure` is set to false.
- `key_file` (no default): path to the TLS key to use for TLS required connections. Should
  only be used if `insecure` is set to false.

The following settings can be optionally configured:

- `external_labels`: map of labels names and values to be attached to each metric data point
- `headers`: additional headers attached to each HTTP request.
  - *Note the following headers cannot be changed: `Content-Encoding`, `Content-Type`, `X-Prometheus-Remote-Write-Version`, and `User-Agent`.*
- `namespace`: prefix attached to each exported metric name.
- `add_metric_suffixes`: If set to false, type and unit suffixes will not be added to metrics. Default: true.
- `remote_write_queue`: fine tuning for queueing and sending of the outgoing remote writes.
  - `enabled`: enable the sending queue
  - `queue_size`: number of OTLP metrics that can be queued. Ignored if `enabled` is `false`
  - `num_consumers`: minimum number of workers to use to fan out the outgoing requests.
- `resource_to_telemetry_conversion`
  - `enabled` (default = false): If `enabled` is `true`, all the resource attributes will be converted to metric labels by default.
- `target_info`: customize `target_info` metric
  - `enabled` (default = true): If `enabled` is `true`, a `target_info` metric will be generated for each resource metric (see https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/2381).
- `scope_info`: customize `otel_scope_info` metric
  - `enabled` (default = false): If `enabled` is `true`, a `otel_scope_info` metric will be generated for each instrumentation scope metric (see https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/2703).
- `export_created_metric`:
  - `enabled` (default = false): If `enabled` is `true`, a `_created` metric is
    exported for Summary, Histogram, and Monotonic Sum metric points if
    `StartTimeUnixNano` is set.

Example:

```yaml
exporters:
  prometheusremotewrite:
    endpoint: "https://my-cortex:7900/api/v1/push"
    wal: # Enabling the Write-Ahead-Log for the exporter.
      directory: ./prom_rw # The directory to store the WAL in
      buffer_size: 100 # Optional count of elements to be read from the WAL before truncating; default of 300
      truncate_frequency: 45s # Optional frequency for how often the WAL should be truncated. It is a time.ParseDuration; default of 1m
    resource_to_telemetry_conversion:
      enabled: true # Convert resource attributes to metric labels
```

Example:

```yaml
exporters:
  prometheusremotewrite:
    endpoint: "https://my-cortex:7900/api/v1/push"
    external_labels:
      label_name1: label_value1
      label_name2: label_value2
```

## Advanced Configuration

Several helper files are leveraged to provide additional capabilities automatically:

- [HTTP settings](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/config/confighttp/README.md)
- [TLS and mTLS settings](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/config/configtls/README.md)
- [Retry and timeout settings](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/exporter/exporterhelper/README.md), note that the exporter doesn't support `sending_queue` but provides `remote_write_queue`.

## Metric names and labels normalization

OpenTelemetry metric names and attributes are normalized to be compliant with Prometheus naming rules. [Details on this normalization process are described in the Prometheus translator module](../../pkg/translator/prometheus/).

[beta]:https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector#beta
[contrib]:https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-releases/tree/main/distributions/otelcol-contrib
[core]:https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-releases/tree/main/distributions/otelcol
